While probably not front and center in your mind in September in a pandemic… the team working on the deployment of the next generation FIRST Robotics Competition control system wanted to provide an update to our February, 2020 pre-pandemic blog on the matter. The whole team is excited about getting these new devices to the community, but the roll out needs a bit of revision. Shocker, right?  

Here’s the latest and greatest of where we are as of this moment…

NI will provide the next generation roboRIO 
Similar functionality (improvements are evolutionary, not revolutionary) 
NI has made targeted changes to improve the user experience with roboRIO 2.0 including increased memory, increased on-board storage, and increased processor speed.  
roboRIO 2.0 is designed to be backwards-compatible with hardware and software from the original roboRIO   
NI will donate 1 roboRIO 2.0 per Rookie Kickoff Kit in FRC seasons 2022-2026 (in addition to other important support of FIRST that emphasizes ED&I)
REV Robotics will provide brand-new support modules 
Power Distribution Hub 
20 power distribution channels 
40A load capability on all channels 
2 software switchable channels 
All toolless & connectorless terminals 
USB & CAN interfaces 
Pneumatic Hub 
12 solenoid channels (6 double solenoids) 
Analog and digital pressure sensing 
Regulated 12V & 24V modes 
USB & CAN interfaces 
Voltage Regulation Hub 
12v or 5v module options 
3 individually protected output channels 
Due to Covid-19 impacts (overall cost considerations and no off-season events available for testing brand-new products), FIRST is delaying rollout of the new REV boards in Kickoff Kits until the 2023 FRC season.  

REV is on track with the new support modules, getting ready for a launch in 2021 for the 2022 Season. FIRST may make these new products competition legal in 2022 for teams who choose to adopt these products on their own. 

For the 2022 Season, rookie teams will receive the existing CTRE products and these products will continue to remain competition legal in future years. 
WPI and the WPILib development team will provide software in support of the new devices. 
The wireless solution will continue to be the Open Mesh radio for the foreseeable future, and we will continue to pursue a solution to succeed these radios.
We emphasize that this is our plan as of today and encourage absorbing this with a Jupiter-sized grain of salt given that we all face so much uncertainty regarding the pandemic. We commit to providing updates though, so please stay tuned!  

 
