The book talks were short oral previews of each available book
choice. In essence, Catherine created a brief summary of each including
the level of difficulty, plot and character overview. Each talk ended with
a "clifflhanger" statement to stimulate student curiosity.
Implementation
After hearing book talks, students reviewed the books and made a
list of their top three choices. Students were then grouped according to
their preferences and without regard to reading ability (Samway &
Whang, 1996). After the groups were formed, they met and planned their
reading goals on a group calendar. For the following two to three weeks,
students met in their groups to read and discuss their books. ELL
students and struggling readers were afforded the opportunity to read
with a buddy or to read along with a taped recording of the book.
Catherine met with each group at least twice as an observer and to
listen in on their discussions. In addition to reading, students wrote
responses in a literature response journal to prepare for discussions. They
also completed two to three extensions projects focused on their books,
which were shared and discussed in the literature circles (See Table 1).
Once students completed the reading they worked on a culminating
project to demonstrate the group's understanding of their book and to
encourage others to read it. The rubric for assessing the culminating
projects was developed in a whole group setting with student input on
what they thought should be assessed. Each group presentation was
videotaped and later reviewed by students for self-assessment purposes.
Findings
After concluding the first round of literature circles, students were
asked to reflect in writing about what they enjoyed and what they
struggled with during their literature circle experience. Their feedba.ck
was combined with the teacher's personal observations and anecdotal
notes and used in making decisions about the structural changes to
implement in the future. Although all students reported enjoying
participating in literature circles, the greatest successes and increased
levels of enthusiasm were evident among the ELL students and the
