


Integration
Using the FTP Adapter with Oracle Integration
Configure a Stage File Action to Read Individual Files
Add a stage file action to read the contents of the individual files within the zip file. For the files to be successfully read, you must also specify the schema file (by loading a comma-separated value (CSV) or .txt file) that contains the required data structure.

On the right side of the canvas, click Actions Actions icon and drag and drop the Stage File action (present under Data) inside the Iterate_Files_In_Zip action. Placing the stage file action within the loop ensures that each file is read iteratively.
Description of add-stage-file.png follows
Description of the illustration add-stage-file.png

The Configure Stage File Action dialog is displayed.

On the Basic Info page, enter a name for the action (Process_Single_File). Click Next.
On the Configure Operation page, enter the following details.
Field	Information to Enter
Choose Stage File Operation

Select Read Entire File.
Configure File Reference

Select No to process files using names.
Specify the File Name	
Click Edit Edit icon to build an expression to specify the name of the file to be read. We'll use the alias you specified for the current file under iteration in the previous action (that is, OneTextFile) and extract the actual file name from it.

In the Source tree, search for OneTextFile. Select the filename field present under $OneTextFile > ICSFile > Properties, and click Move Move icon to populate the Expression field on the right.

Click Save and then Exit Expression Builder.

Specify the Directory to read from	
Click Edit Edit icon to build an expression to specify the directory from which to read files.

Select the directory field present under $OneTextFile > ICSFile > Properties, and click Move Move icon to populate the Expression field on the right.

Click Save and then Exit Expression Builder.

Click Next.

Leave the configurations on the Schema Options page as they are. Click Next.
On the Format Definition page, perform the following actions to upload a file from which to create a schema.
Field	Information to Enter
Select the Delimited Data File	
Click Choose File and upload the test-file3.txt file you created. See Create a Sample Zip File.

The content of the file is then displayed at the bottom of the page.

Enter the Record Name	
Enter the name you want to assign to the records in the schema file. This becomes the parent element in the created schema file for the record names selected as column headers from the CSV file.

Enter Row.

Enter the Recordset Name	
Enter the name you want to assign to the recordset in the schema file. This becomes the root element of the created schema file.

Enter RowSet.

Use the First Row as Column Headers	
Deselect this check box.

The rest of the fields are automatically populated from the uploaded CSV file. Click Next.

On the Summary page, review the data you've entered and click Done.
