@Dependabot is moving natively into GitHub! 
Dependabot config files
These docs are for "Dependabot Preview", the legacy non-native version of Dependabot. Use these docs if you have a .dependabot/config.yml checked into your repository. If you're new to Dependabot, learn more about how to set up the GitHub-native version.

You can configure multiple projects and languages from a file named config.yml. The config.yml file is located in a folder named .dependabot at the root of your repository.

All available configration options are documented below.

Getting started
Add the following file to the root of your repository (on the default branch): .dependabot/config.yml (see example).

If you haven't done so already, you'll first need to sign up and grant Dependabot access to your repositories.

Example config.yml files
With only required options
With default labels and reviewers
Config file validator
Check your config file using our online tool:

Validate your .dependabot/config.yml file
Dependabot will create an issue on your repository if there are any problems parsing the config file (make sure you've got GitHub Issues enabled to hear about any problems).

Available configuration options
The config file must start with version: 1 followed by an array of update_configs.

Option	Required	Description
package_manager	yes	What package manager to use
directory	yes	Where to look for package manifests
update_schedule	yes	How often to check for updates
target_branch	no	Branch to create pull requests against
default_reviewers	no	Reviewers to set on pull requests
default_assignees	no	Assignees to set on pull requests
default_labels	no	Labels to set on pull requests
default_milestone	no	Milestone to set on pull requests
allowed_updates	no	Limit which updates are allowed
ignored_updates	no	Ignore certain dependencies or versions
automerged_updates	no	Updates that should be merged automatically
version_requirement_updates	no	How to update manifest version requirements
commit_message	no	Commit message preferences
package_manager (required)
Supported package managers:

javascript
ruby:bundler
php:composer
python
go:modules
go:dep
java:maven
java:gradle
dotnet:nuget
rust:cargo
elixir:hex
docker
terraform
submodules
elm
Example: package manager
directory (required)
Where to look for package manifests (e.g. your package.json or Gemfile). The directory is relative to the repository's root.

Example: directory
update_schedule (required)
How often to check for non-security updates and when to create pull requests. Security updates are always created as soon as possible (i.e., "live").

Available schedules
live

Only supported by the following package managers

javascript
ruby:bundler
python
php:composer
dotnet:nuget
rust:cargo
elixir:hex
daily

Only runs on weekdays (Monday to Friday)
weekly
monthly
For daily and weekly schedules you can also specify the run day and time in your dashboard account settings.

Example: update schedule
target_branch
Branch to create pull requests against.

By default your repository's default branch is used.

Example: target branch
default_reviewers
Reviewers to set on update pull requests.

Example: default reviewers
default_assignees
Assignees to set on update pull requests.

Example: default assignees
default_labels
Labels to set on update pull requests.

By default dependencies is used.

Example: default labels
default_milestone
Milestone to set on dependency update pull requests.

Specified using the milestone number - you can find this in the URL when looking at details of a milestone in GitHub.

Example: default milestone
allowed_updates
Limit which updates are allowed.

By default all direct/top-level dependencies are kept up to date (indirect/sub-dependencies are only updated if they include security fixes).

Note: the For Java dependencies the dependency_name attribute should be prefixed with the groupId and artifactId of the dependency, joined by a : (for example: org.kohsuke:github-api).

Example: only allow security updates
Example: updates matching on dependency name or security updates
Example: update matching direct/top-level dependencies on name
Example: all updates including indirect/sub-dependencies
Example: updates matching dependency type and update type
ignored_updates
By default no updates are ignored.

Note: the For Java dependencies the dependency_name attribute should be prefixed with the groupId and artifactId of the dependency, joined by a : (for example: org.kohsuke:github-api).

Example: ignored updates
automerged_updates
Automerged updates must be enabled at the account level (from account settings in your dashboard) before they can be configured on a project.

Note: Depenadbot will automerge any pull request that has an approving review if you enable Treat PR approval as a request to merge from your account settings. This setting applies globablly to all repositories.

Specify which update pull requests should be merged automatically.

By default no updates are automerged.

For all of the options below Dependabot will wait until all your status checks pass before merging. You can also set working hours for automerging in your dashboard account settings.

Note: the For Java dependencies the dependency_name attribute should be prefixed with the groupId and artifactId of the dependency, joined by a : (for example: org.kohsuke:github-api).

Example: automerge based on dependency type
Example: automerge based on dependency name
version_requirement_updates
Specify how Dependabot should update your package manifest (e.g. package.json, Gemfile etc), as opposed to your lockfile.

By default, version requirements are increased if it's an app and the range widened if it's a library (widen_ranges is used for javascript ,python, php:composer, go:dep and increase_versions_if_necessary is used for ruby:bundler and rust:cargo).

Library detection varies dependeing on the package manager but usually means there is no lockfile or the manifest has a library type set.

Available update strategies
off (Only lockfile updates, ignoring updates that require package manifest changes)
auto: (Increase versions if an app, widen ranges if a library)

Only supported by the following package managers

javascript
ruby:bundler
go:dep
python
php:composer
rust:cargo
elixir:hex
widen_ranges: (Relax the version requirement to include both the new and old version when possible)

Only supported by the following package managers

javascript
php:composer
go:dep
increase_versions (Always increase the version requirement to match the new version)

Only supported by the following package managers

javascript
ruby:bundler
php:composer
go:dep
increase_versions_if_necessary (Increase the version requirement only when required by the new version)

Only supported by the following package managers

javascript
ruby:bundler
php:composer
commit_message
Preferences for the format of Dependabot's commit messages and pull request titles.

By default, Dependabot will attempt to detect your commit message preferences and use those.

Example: custom commit prefix
Example: custom commit prefix with scope
Example: custom commit prefix for prod and development dependencies
© Dependabot 2019
Privacy
Terms of service
Documentation
Twitter
GitHub
Contact us
