


Integration
Using the FTP Adapter with Oracle Integration
Connect to a Private FTP Server Using the FTP Adapter
You can integrate Oracle Integration with an FTP server, even when that server is in a private network and not accessible publicly. This scenario is possible when you configure the connectivity agent with the FTP Adapter.

The FTP Adapter supports connectivity to the following servers:

FTP/sFTP server hosted on-premises through the connectivity agent
FTP/sFTP server hosted in the cloud without the connectivity agent
See Manage the Agent Group and the On-Premises Connectivity Agent in Provisioning and Administering Oracle Integration and Oracle Integration for SaaS, Generation 2.

Configure Connection Properties

Provide connection property values:
In the Connection Properties section on the Connections page:
Enter the FTP/sFTP host address and port.
If using a secure FTP server, select Yes for the SFTP Connection field. Otherwise, select No.

Connection Properties section with FTP Server Host Address, FTP Server Port, and SFTP Connection fields

Configure Connection Security

Provide connection security values:

In the Security section on the Connections page, select the security policy:
FTP Server Access Policy: For username/password authentication.
FTP Public Key Authentication: For public key authentication.
FTP Multi Level Authentication: For authentication using both username/password and public key.

Security section with options for FTP Server Access Policy, FTP Public Key Authentication, and FTP Multi Level Authentication.

Configure Agent Group

If the FTP server is not directly accessible from Oracle Integration (for example, the server is installed on-premises or behind a firewall), you must configure the connectivity agent for this connection. This can be done in the Configure Agents section.
Select an Agent group dialog with available agent groups listed.

There are file size limits when using the FTP Adapter. For example, the Download File operation on the Operations page does not support a schema, and can send a file of up to 1 GB in size. The download may take time to complete considering the network latency between the connectivity agent and Oracle Integration. See Service Limits.

There are also restrictions when the FTP Adapter is configured with the connectivity agent. See FTP Adapter Restrictions.
Was this page helpful?  
About Oracle
Contact Us
Products A-Z
Terms of Use & Privacy
Cookie Preferences
Ad Choices
© Oracle
