Clear, enable, and manage cookies in browser
You can choose to delete existing cookies, allow or block all cookies, and set preferences for certain websites.

What cookies are
Cookies are files created by websites you visit. They make your online experience easier by saving browsing information. With cookies, sites can keep you signed in, remember your site preferences, and give you locally relevant content.

There are two types of cookies:

First-party cookies are created by the site you visit. The site is shown in the address bar.
Third-party cookies are created by other sites. These sites own some of the content, like ads or images, that you see on the webpage you visit.
Android ComputeriPhone & iPad
Clear all cookies
If you remove cookies, you'll be signed out of websites and your saved preferences could be deleted.

On your Android phone or tablet, open the Chrome app Chrome.
To the right of the address bar, tap More More and then Settings.
Tap Privacy and then Clear browsing data.
Choose a time range, like Last hour or All time.
Check "Cookies, media licenses and site data." Uncheck all the other items.
Tap Clear data and then Clear.
Allow or block cookies
You can allow or block cookies saved by websites.

Note: If you don't allow sites to save cookies, most sites that require you to sign in won't work.

On your Android phone or tablet, open the Chrome app Chrome.
To the right of the address bar, tap More More and then Settings.
Tap Site settings and then Cookies.
Turn Cookies on or off.
Block cookies from other sites
You can allow cookies from sites you visit and block cookies from other sites that own ads or images that appear on that site.

On your Android phone or tablet, open the Chrome app Chrome.
Go to a website.
To the right of the address bar, tap More More and then Info Informationand then Cookies.
Tap Block third party cookies
Tip: All cookies and site data from other sites will be blocked, even if the site is on your exceptions list.

Clear cookies from a single site
On your Android phone or tablet, open the Chrome app Chrome.
Go to a website.
To the right of the address bar, tap More More and then Info Informationand then Cookies.
Next to the number of cookies in use, tap Delete Remove.
Related articles
Adjust website content settings
Clear browsing data
Clear cache and cookies
