NATO Logo
Last updated: 09 Dec. 2020 09:45
Also available in: French

WATCH THE SCIENCE SERIESTAKE THE QUIZEXPLORE VINTAGE TECHFIGHTING COVID-19DIVE DEEPER
NATO works with international networks of scientists and researchers from Allied and partner countries. Their research includes both security-related civil science projects and defence innovation projects to develop long-term capabilities. NATO supports these scientists by providing grant funding; creating channels that allow scientists to share and receive expert advice; and organising tailor-made activities that enhance practical cooperation on security-related science.


Watch the science series
From stratospheric balloons to fast-healing bandages, NATO scientists are working on new technologies every day that make us safer and more secure. Watch the videos below to learn more about NATO science!


NATO Science series trailer
Watch the series trailer for highlights of all five featured NATO science projects.
Rapid skin wound healing
Rapid skin wound healing
Have you ever wished you had rapid healing powers like Wolverine from X-Men? In our first episode, travel to Brussels to learn how NATO scientists in Belgium are building disposable skin patches that heal wounds faster. These "smart bandages" will provide quick relief to civilians and military personnel injured by chemical or physical agents.
High-altitude balloon-borne radar
High-altitude balloon-borne radar
Next stop: Pisa! Galileo might have dropped objects off the Leaning Tower, but NATO scientists in Italy are doing the opposite – launching things into the sky! Soaring into the stratosphere, a mini-radar system carried by a balloon is a low-cost, highly effective way to get the ultimate picture of what's happening down below.
The Next-Generation Incident Command System
The Next-Generation Incident Command System
Next up, pop over to Podgorica to learn how NATO scientists in Montenegro are helping first responders get a full picture in emergency situations. Developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a new network speeds up information sharing – including images and location markers – across international borders and in real time.
Training by gaming 
Training by gaming
Be honest – do you pay more attention to classroom lectures, or to interactive games? Visit Ankara to discover how NATO scientists in Turkey are using gamification to train the next generation of security specialists, prompting them to imagine complex scenarios and come up with creative security solutions.
UGO-1ST – the explosive ordnance disposal robot 
UGO-1ST – the explosive ordnance disposal robot
Finish your journey in Florence, where NATO scientists in Italy are building a robot that saves lives. The UGO-1st remote-controlled unit takes the lead when looking for landmines and roadside bombs. This semi-autonomous droid uses new impulse radar and 3D data for real-time detection of explosives.
BACK TO TOP


Which NATO-affiliated Nobel laureate are you?
Take the quiz to find out!
More than 20 scientists involved in NATO science projects have won Nobel Prizes. From French liquid crystals physicist Pierre-Gilles de Gennes to Egyptian-American "father of femtochemistry" Ahmed Zewail, these scientists have made major contributions in many research areas.

Answer the 10 questions below to learn which NATO-affiliated Nobel laureate you are most like.



1. What would you want to be remembered for?Q/A¿





 
Explore vintage tech @AlienDev
NATO Allies have contributed massively to scientific research and innovation over the past decades. Click through the gallery to discover some of the vintage technologies that NATO scientists developed in the early days of NATO scientific cooperation, from the 1950s to 1970s.

 



 
Fighting COVID-19 -R vs Julia
Scientists across the Alliance are on the front lines of the fight against COVID-19. In April 2020, NATO's Chief Scientist issued a challenge to NATO's network of over 6,000 defence scientists, calling for solutions in virus detection, improved situational awareness, decontamination, resilience and the post-COVID-19 future. Click through the gallery below to learn more about how NATO scientists are helping fight the coronavirus.

 
@AlienDev
Dive deeper into NATO science
Can't get enough NATO science? Visit the pages below to discover more!


#NATO Science for Peace and Security Programme
NATO Science and Technology Organization
NATO & Science on YouTube – explore other science-related videos!
NATO on the Map – discover other NATO SPS projects in your country!
NATO Science news – read the latest science-related updates!
NATO Centre for Maritime Research & Experimentation


BACK TO TOP
Enter your email address
SUBSCRIBE TO NATO UPDATES
This website uses cookies to ensure we can provide you with the best browsing experience.x
