Thermal camera view
Gjoko Krstic, a security researcher with Zero Science Labs, has discovered secret hard-coded accounts in thermal security cameras manufactured by FLIR Systems, Inc., one of the largest vendor of such products.

According to Krstic, the backdoor accounts "are never exposed to the end-user and cannot be changed through any normal operation of the camera."

Multiple product series affected
The hard-coded credentials affect the following FLIR thermal camera series:
A ransomware gang made $260,000 in 5 days using the 7zip utility

FC-Series S (FC-334-NTSC)
FC-Series ID
FC-Series R
PT-Series (PT-334 200562)
D-Series
F-Series
Depending on the FLIR camera version, the following username-password combos will grant an attacker access over the device.


 
root:indigo
root:video
default:video
default:[blank]
ftp:video
Besides the secret backdoors, Krstic also found four other vulnerabilities:

Stream Disclosure — attackers can access the security camera's stream without needing to authenticate.
Remote Root Exploit — attackers can execute code on vulnerable cameras with root privileges.
Authenticated OS Command Injection — attackers with access to limited accounts can inject commands and have them executed with root privileges.
Multiple Information Disclosures — attackers can access/query certain camera files and read other local resources.
No response from vendor
The researcher reported the vulnerabilities to FLIR, via the Beyond Security's managed disclosure program, but neither he or Beyond Security received a response from FLIR regarding the issues.

In late September, Krstic published proof of concept code for all the issues he reported [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].


Two days ago, Depth Security also published research on other vulnerabilities in FLIR products the company failed to patch.

There are several ways that FLIR customers can protect themselves. The easiest one is to prevent access to these cameras from the Internet by placing the devices behind a firewall until the vendor issues a patch.

UPDATE [October 17, 15:35 ET]: FLIR has told Bleeping Computer that it issued security updates for the flaws reported above. Customers can download the firmware updates and installation instructions from this page.

FLIR is a well-known brand for security cameras. Its thermal cameras are nothing more than regular IP-based security cameras with the extra feature of being able to function in thermal mode during night time.

FLIR's thermal camera imaging capabilities have been recently used to film the "Walk On Water" music video by famous rock band 30 Seconds to Mars.


Related Articles:
QNAP removes backdoor account in NAS backup, disaster recovery app

Microsoft's MSERT tool now finds web shells from Exchange Server attacks

Google fixes exploited Chrome zero-day dropped on Twitter last week

CISA orders federal orgs to mitigate Pulse Secure VPN bug by Friday

SonicWall warns customers to patch 3 zero-days exploited in the wild
